_learning/business_ideas.md, before:

---
title: "Business Ideas"
excerpt: "Crazy Hair Brained Scheme To Get Rich From"
---

## Going To Freelancing

Can find jobs online via
- Upwork
- LinkedIn
- Toptal
- Angel.co

But are you going to spend a ton of time on small projects? Are you okay with just lots of small projects? Do you want to work on something more long term? How much time are you going to spend trying to find projects?

Will this scale? How to get bigger? Can you get small businesses and do a lot for them? Is this what you do for 20 years?

I would like to do data science training too.


## Residual income ideas

##### Sell Prints on Online (Etsy)
- Maps
- Sports
- Music?
- Plays?


##### Websites
- Help Me Decide Website
    - Helps you compare 2 jobs on different aspects: pay, environment, work, schedule, benefits, ects
    - Could generalize to schools, to boyfriends, to any choice

- Read your resume to find jobs
    - It sucks you have to find jobs that match, why not have the resume and then find jobs...does glass door do this?

- Data Science Society


##### Online Courses
- Data Science / Python Courses
- Could be YouTube too
- Could put a specialty on Modern Engineers (becoming more stats saavy.)
- Could be about doing college / choosing major / finding jobs

##### Book (note these could be ebooks? or thrown into online courses)
- Utah data viz book
- How To Get Paid to Go to College and land a 6 figure salary

##### Tech Products
- Smart Wake Surf Board
- Computer vision kids sports (tracking and highlights and stuff)

##### Products
- T shirts

##### Software
- Jeni?
- Dash applications for sports
- Dash applications for engineering


##### Stocks
- Automated stock trading

Commit message:

adding a lot of files to learning including podcasts, control charts, boosting, linkedin, data influencers

_learning/business_ideas.md, after:

---
title: "Business Ideas"
excerpt: "Crazy Hair Brained Scheme To Get Rich From"
---

## Going To Freelancing

Can find jobs online SS
- Upwork
- LinkedIn
- Toptal
- Angel.co

But are you going to spend a ton of time on small projects? Are you okay with just lots of small projects? Do you want to work on something more long term? How much time are you going to spend trying to find pSrojects?

Will this scale? How to get bigger? Can you get small businesses and do a lot for them? Is this what you do for 20 years?

I would like to do data science training too.


## Residual income ideas

##### Sell Prints on Online (Etsy)
- Maps
  - Just aesthetic maps of cities
- Sports
- Music?
- Plays?
- Old books?


##### Websites
- Help Me Decide Website
    - Helps you compare 2 jobs on different aspects: pay, environment, work, schedule, benefits, ects
    - Could generalize to schools, to boyfriends, to any choice

- Read your resume to find jobs
    - It sucks you have to find jobs that match, why not have the resume and then find jobs...does glass door do this?

- Data Science Society


##### Online Courses
- Data Science / Python Courses
- Could be YouTube too
- Could put a specialty on Modern Engineers (becoming more stats saavy.)
- Could be about doing college / choosing major / finding jobs
- Just one course on LinkedIn (how to do data science )

##### Book (note these could be ebooks? or thrown into online courses)
- Utah data viz book
- How To Get Paid to Go to College and land a 6 figure salary

##### Tech Products
- Smart Wake Surf Board
- Computer vision kids sports (tracking and highlights and stuff)

##### Products
- T shirts

##### Software
- Jeni?
- Dash applications for sports
- Dash applications for engineering


##### Stocks
- Automated stock trading
